to tell you what I'm doing.
And if you could, just for the purposes of this tape, tell us who you are and what you do here with Corvus.
My name is Charles Mossey.
I'm the director of media development at Corvus, and my central responsibility is in the guiding and building of the development of the Corvus archive, which I sort of lovingly have called the Digital Alexandria.
So when you see my book, I start with Alexandria.
Well, I like Bach as well.
I like the way things come back.
This is a little different than Alexandria, and it's different beyond the fact that just the fact that we have backup tapes.
So I'd like Alexandria, which didn't.
That's an excellent quote.
The interesting thing about my role here, and it's really a role that's part of the group,
the whole evolution of the Corvus archive, which is at the center, really, of all of our activities.
We publish out of it.
Our CD-ROMs celebrate the material that's in the archive.
We license it out for reproduction rights, so we act as a resource to the traditional and even new publishing industries that materials that we have can be available for anyone engaging in those kinds of products.
We intend to develop this as well.
for educational and consumer applications as a research resource or an entertainment resource.
So this is really, functions kind of like a library, but in one very different component.
It's digital.
Now, in terms of your first book, which I think, you know, if you mentioned
then you'll probably have some kind of... Okay, Bach is in this as well.
Open the second book.
Go ahead.
You know, the idea ties together.
When it comes to books, I have to confess to being one of the afflicted.
Okay.
I mean, there's something about... You don't know my book?
No, this is very odd, but I had to... I mean, it's one of these things where, you know, it's sort of like... I'll bring this book back to you if you'd like.
I'd like to see it.
It's like AA for anything else.
I mean, AA for books for me was to stop.
I had a huge private collection.
But there's something I think about.
There can't be.
There's something about stroking 17th century vellum and just knowing and thinking about what that means.
You don't know my book, A Gentle Madness?
The subtitle is Bibliophiles, Bibliomains, and an Eternal Passion for Books.
I had a full-page review in the New York Times.
It boggles my mind.
I was on Brian Lamb's show twice.
In fact, he rebroadcasted this for Christmas.
I love this.
So I love books, and as a book lover, I do not feel by any stretch that the computer's going to replace the book.
But there's a couple very different kinds of, and again, I'll show my limitations really with computers when I talk about this, but I think there's two fairly different things that we're talking about here.
The computers and computer technology and visual archives, or the digital Alexandria that I'm talking about in terms of Corbus,
and a real Alexandria.
And one is, in its most basic level, is a tactile distinction.
It's one of, what role do books play in our lives?
And I have to say that for me, and for many people that I know, the role is more than just as an information resource.
It's part of an experience.
It's something that's really built.
It's almost become genetic.
It's about the urge to climb a tree when we hear the lion roar.
I mean, when we think about our relationship with the printed words since its inception, and what role that's taken over from the days when knowledge was transmitted by storytellers and minstrels that wandered through the countryside.
I mean, it's a very important role, I think, that's
that books have taken over.
And I don't think that computers and computer information and computer technology, the computer's ability to organize and present and retrieve massive amounts of information, is really going to replace an experience that sort of has its roots almost in the spiritual and cultural and personal aspects of who we are as a species.
I mean, this is, you know, my own view on this.
Well, there's a distinctive difference between information and the kind of knowledge
that you get in a book.
I mean, a computer does data and information, but is that the appropriate vehicle for, you know, what we're talking about in terms of books?
Well, it's really interesting to look at the advent of some of the new publishing, the attempts to do magazines on the web and do editorial commentary on magazines on the web, so clearly people are working around this notion that there's
that computers are one of the next steps in how we share information between each other and how we share information on a global level and to an extent never before possible by the printed page.
And interestingly enough, in ways that can be very personal, you know, it's not been the case in the past where you or I or anyone as an individual, whether they're a photographer or a writer, could simply
in a very quick period of time, publish our own manuscript, you know, whether it's words or visuals or a combination of both, talk about issues or ideas that are important to us.
Now, with the advent of the web and computers, we can do that and reach an audience far broader than any traditional publisher might have been able to do.
But is that really the same as publishing a book?
I would argue that there's distinctions that are so deep as to go beyond the simple argument that computers could organize the information better and could distribute it more broadly and do it much quicker.
But it's how I feel about the role that books play in our culture, what they've evolved into.
It's a pretty interesting position you find yourself in, isn't it, you personally?
It is.
I mean, in this company, in this place,
at this time, with the technology you have available to you and the mandate, apparently, that you've been... In fact, for the record, why don't you tell me what your position is, your title?
Well, the director of media development, in terms of it's my responsibilities for building the archive.
I mean, the mandate for how that archive, the look and feel and scope and breadth and depth of the archive, really comes from Bill, in Bill's vision for how this should look.
Bill Gates.
The summary I like to use is that this archive is about, in the process of building, is about creating a visual resource, a visual encyclopedia, if you will, that spans the whole of human experience through time.
And it does that across media.
Now we're focusing on the still image in art.
We'll broaden that out over time, and as technology allows to include film and video and sound and text,
and other media has evolved, and they'll all be linked together so that we create the relationships between those different components.
But now the focus is on still imagery and art.
So you must confer often with Bill?
I don't personally, a couple times a year.
But you pretty much, does he give you an idea of what the kinds of things that he will... Yes, he does.
And, you know, our senior... Not marching orders per se, but just the general philosophical
Yeah, sort of, you know, sort of, yes, we'd like this to be editorial in nature.
We'd like the materials to be informative and informational.
We'd like these to be images or pictures of art that not only are art and talking about art as a part of the cultural experience, but also art as a window into the human experience pre-photography.
Because at a certain point in time, you have to go, you quickly slip beyond the realm of photography, and now you're into the realm of words and art.
And the other things that we used to capture, the wood blocks, or whatever we used to capture and depict human experience, our daily lives.
However, that was pre-photography.
Those are the resources that we have to draw on.
And you can sort of step that back to cave paintings of our prehistoric, you know,
natural history counterparts, whether it's a mastodon or an antelope on a wall in a cave in southern France.
So you can actually, now we may capture that with photography, but the art itself is, you know.
Do you have a comprehensive scheme?
We do, and it's one that we're constantly refining.
In fact, a major project that I have underway now is to really begin to create a new road map, you know, for the archive.
And that's so critical for a number of reasons, is that
How do you think about a road map like that?
Kind of the way that I've thought about it, characterized it in the past as an example, just by way of illustration.
Let's take any one of our major encyclopedias, maybe Encyclopedia Britannica, and if you take the Britannica and you blow all of the body text out of it, you're left with a lot of headings and subheadings that represent different categories of human experience.
Great life.
information about the world that we live in, we've developed in.
And if you were to take Latin America's equivalent of Britannica, and Africa's equivalent of Britannica, and India's equivalent of Britannica, and do the same thing, and then merge it, you know, delete the similars, you begin to get a structure of knowledge and a structure of
human experience of the different categories of that in our science, our literature, our art, our history, okay?
All of those pieces at that very top level become like markers, or almost become like vessels.
They're the key events.
They're the key cultural things.
They're the key parts of science and technology that we've developed.
Our task is, in looking at that kind of very comprehensive structure,
to find the visual materials, primarily again now photography, and fill those vessels, each one of those categories, with the right amount, and that's always an issue, of illustration, what illustrates that.
When you're talking about photography, you're talking about photographs of images, not necessarily photographs of events.
Well, it could be photographs of events, too.
Photojournalism, for example, is of major importance to us, because what you see now in contemporary photojournalism is really
compelling documents that will be our history tomorrow, just as when you step back and you look at, you know, the work done around the Civil War and how compelling.
I mean, Ken Burns did this amazing series, all out of still images.
Amazing.
That's actually an interesting thing about how computers might function to give us insight, how they may differ from a book, because, you know, what he did really for PBS, similar
analogies in terms of structure and presentation and organization, I think we'll see that on the web.
How about developing the narrative aspects of the film?
Well, sound is going to be part of that.
When you get a chance to spend time with Curtis Wong, who's developed some of our titles, you'll begin to see, I think, some of the shape of
how the computer is going to be used, how it's going to relate to books, because what you see on a CD-ROM maybe is a stepping stone.
I look at CD-ROMs, again, with my limited understanding of the technology involved, but I sort of look at CD-ROMs as really laying the groundwork for what's going to take place over the Internet or what's going to come down through our cables.
It'll probably come down through multiple channels of distribution directly into our homes.
Now, you say you're a limited knowledge of the technology, so why don't you tell me a little bit about your background?
Excuse me.
I'm sorry.
You know, my background is in biochemistry and botany.
Are you from around here?
San Francisco.
I went to school in Berkeley, California.
I've always been on the West Coast.
my background in the sciences, but also beyond that I spent most of my life struggling against the academic institutions to create an interdisciplinary major that integrated science and philosophy and religion.
Interesting.
They never quite gave it to me.
They were always absolutely sure that that was such a philosophical position that I thought I should be a philosophy major and forget that.
I have a firm belief that there's integration.
I do not see simple distinctions between those three.
I see them as integrated deeply.
I not only think that way, I feel that way.
So how did you get into this?
It became really clear to me that my future was not going to be doing scientific research.
I had a couple of interesting experiences that really convinced me that was not the route I wanted to go down.
I had a passion for photography, and decided, well, the best thing you do with that kind of background is become a photographer.
Visual communication is really important to me.
I mean, you have to remember, I was kind of a child of the 60s and 70s, you know, late 60s, early 70s, so a lot of my background was informed of coming out of the civil rights movement, Berkeley, free speech, you know, from Hayden.
Well, I'm from Sam, from...
The 60s is my decade as well.
Same age probably as I am.
So, you know, one of the biggest frustrations I had at that time was really how the flow of information was controlled.
And not just in the, you know, trying to bring civil rights issues to a broader awareness, but a lot of the issues around the Vietnam War and international policy and world policy and the nature of world governments and how do governments communicate with each other, or more particularly,
How do governments get in the way of populations communicating with each other?
And it was an ongoing frustration for me, you know, whether it's the subtle or gross signs of censorship and the free flow of information around this planet.
Major frustration.
And I can think of a dozen little instances in my own personal research and work I was doing where I remember getting books from
a library that was involved with the Vatican where the book arrived finally after months of trying to get it.
Comparative religion is an area of interest of mine.
And the book was sealed in tape that said Carcer in Latin around it.
And it hadn't been opened.
God knows how many.
You got this at Berkeley?
I got it through a very, actually a combination of working through Berkeley and the Theological Seminary.
They sent it from Rome here for you to study?
Yeah, to look at it, and I had to break the tape on it to look at it.
Wow.
But it was that idea and how hard it was to get that in on.
It was a physical obstruction.
It was tape.
It was literally tape around it.
But this wasn't an index to talk about it.
Paul Leclerc at the New York Public Library.
His book.
Yeah, but he told me of an instance in the 60s.
He was a few years older than I am.
He was 56.
And he studied at Holy Cross College in Massachusetts.
They sealed their books.
Well, he had to request permission from the bishop in the 60s, 63, 64, to read, was it Reveille, or, you know, it wasn't Voltaire, but it was somebody.
And then the Jesuit brother, teaching the course, had to get permission as well.
I mean, I said, what did the bishop say?
Did he ask you to be careful?
I mean, he said, no, he just gave us permission.
But it's amazing, isn't it, how recently, that's why I'm wondering when you said it was sealed, you know.
It's a book on Gnosticism, research work on Gnosticism.
Not that it's that important for this, but you get, that was, it was very, well, we don't know.
No, it is important because I've talked to Harold Bloom for this book, by the way, and of course he's the, you know, Gnosticism is major
consideration of his.
So we have an early Christianity trying to define itself, and we have all these Neoplatonic cults we have, and the Gnostics were very powerful.
The Gnostics, in some people's opinion, might be closer to the original teachings of Jesus than maybe what we've inherited.
Church is there today, but there were concerns as to why they would not want to have
that kind of information broadly disseminated.
I've even purchased books out of collections.
For yourself?
For myself, where they were sealed similarly with tape, and that probably came out of seminaries that were sold but were never even opened.
At any rate, I mean, the interesting part, I suppose, of how that all ties together is I, you know, sort of making the decision to move into photography
At the same time, I opened a bookstore that I was just finishing my college career.
Amazing you haven't heard of my book.
I suppose new.
I know, I know.
This was a while ago.
How late are you going to be here tonight?
Probably about five.
All right, if I'm out of here before that, I'll try and drop it back.
I'd be great.
I'd love to see it.
Before I go.
I'd probably go crazy by something.
I'm amazed.
But, you know, a lot of things happened.
I had to let that go.
But the interesting thing was to tie this all back together.
But that's why, by the way, I hope you'll allow me to call you with some... Absolutely.
...after I transcribe this thing.
Absolutely.
And I like to, and I, by the way, there are no surprises with me.
I'm happy to go over quotes with you, you know, prior to publication.
Yeah, especially things related to Gnosticism, the Church.
Well, that's incredible.
Are you Catholic?
No.
I should call you.
Well, you know, the interesting thing was, is when I first, you know, most of us, when we started using computers for information, it was like the LexisNexis, and it was database, and it was textural research only.
But when I really began to see a lot of what was taking place, and a number of things actually affected my thinking about what modern technology and communications, whether it's a fax machine or a photocopier or
you know, a computer and a modem in the Internet is doing in terms of breaking down those barriers that frustrated me in the 60s and 70s.
So I'm bringing it up to date.
When I first stumbled into this project here... Now, did you stumble into it?
Actually, I came here to interview them for an article I was writing.
Who gave them?
No, Corbis.
Oh, I see.
I didn't know who Bill was at that time.
He was not on my radar.
Again, I'm not a technologist.
Computers really were a tool for me.
You're perfect for my book, by the way.
Well, computers were not a tool for me.
I mean, they were a tool, but they were not... I had no idea who Bill Gates really was.
Even the first time I met him, I was in a six-hour meeting here with him and a number of other staff.
And he was at the meeting?
He was at the meeting, and I, you know... Yeah, Microsoft, I kind of knew what that was, but I've never read any articles about him.
He was wealthy, but he wasn't as wealthy as Warren Buffett, who was always kind of one of my heroes, and so he wasn't even on my radar.
And really, he didn't even start to become profiled, really, until a few years ago.
I mean, the first I had ever heard of him was in 60 Minutes, you know.
Well, I'm sitting here listening to this guy talk, and he wasn't really addressing any long soliloquy or anything else.
He was just answering and having a dialogue with the staff about sort of the organizational structure and long-term plans, from his point of view, for this company.
And I'm listening to this going...
this is part of the answer this technology with this kind of commitment with this kind of vision is the kind of thing that really can touch deep down into concerns i have about the democracy of information okay if we're very good and very thoughtful about how we build this resource this is not going to be the only resource like this there's other archives like this okay and there will be other archives developing like this but if we can lead and set an example of how you build
a resource like this and be very smart about how we do it in terms of getting both the breadth and the depth.
And even in doing that, be sure that we really build into this a multicultural perspective.
So as we think about world history or human culture, it's not just another white North American male's perspective on that, that we draw out of the very cultures we're trying to cover.
So if we're going to deal with the Hispanic culture of Latin America, or we're going to deal with the Islamic culture of North Africa or the Mediterranean, that we draw on photographers, for example, who grew up in that culture, who speak that language, who understand them, who are part of that culture, so that when we see, whether they're photojournalists, those cultures, through those eyes, their photographs are informed by the same kind of knowledge that a North American photographer would be informed when they were photographing culture here.
What is cultural significance?
And it's powerful how critical that is.
Let me give you one quick example.
And this was just serendipity in a way, but it played directly into it.
I had a photographer came through who showed me his portfolio.
And among the other things, he'd shot for several major national and international publications dealing with people, culture, national geographic style of work.
And one of the things he had was coverage of a market in Ecuador, one of those public markets.
And you looked into it, and there was color and all the flowers and vegetables and colorful robes.
And everyone was looking away from the camera, concentrating on their activities.
Maybe there was a couple people in the distance that were kind of looking on a slightly disturbed way back at the intrusion of the photographer into that moment.
But it was a good document.
You really got a sense that you could see what they were selling, what kind of produce, what kind of textiles.
You could get a sense of that.
It was very visually quite stunning.
That's not bad.
You know, it's a photographer here in the States.
The next day, the very next day, a photographer, an Ecuadorian photographer from Quito comes in, and I'm going through his portfolio.
Comes in here.
So they're coming here basically trying to sell their... It's a license to try to figure out, what are we doing?
Is there a relationship?
And I had met this guy in Europe, oddly enough, but I hadn't seen any of his work.
I saw a book that he had published.
This is the Ecuadorian.
The Ecuadorian, okay.
So we'd already had a relationship.
You know, we had everything in this business is relationship.
And so we established a relationship first, and then he was bringing the work to me to look at.
So I'm going through it.
The third picture I hit is the same market piece.
Now, I mean, and my breath stopped.
I'm looking at this picture, and there's a person who's sort of carrying this big,
thing of vegetables, and they're moving into the frame from the right-hand side, and they're looking back, and they're smiling into the camera.
And you look at the market, and there's people around, and the people aren't looking suspiciously from a distance.
There's no halt.
The activity doesn't look frozen.
There's motion people.
There are a couple people that are looking at the camera, smiling.
Why?
He's one of their own people.
And it was night and day.
The other one was a dead document in my mind at that point.
Okay.
Technically it was perfect, because I described it the first time it would have worked.
But when you get into, okay, what happens when it's someone who participates in that culture?
Maybe it would be worthwhile to even acquire both.
Could be.
I mean, you know, there's a number of... But then, again, of course, for your purposes, you won't.
I'm just thinking in terms of...
A statement that goes to express what you just articulated, you know?
Yeah, well, there's similar issues, because, you know, when we think about photography as art and what that means, and there's pieces to this.
There's the information that's in a photograph or a piece of art, okay, which we've just kind of gave an example of one, but there's also the work in and of itself, okay?
Now, what do you do in terms of issues of restoration?
I mean, we've sort of...
had the experience of seeing the Sistine Chapel and what that represented, but what about photographs?
Photographs taken in the, you know, even photographs in the Vietnam War area, or photographs of the civil rights, if they were color transparency, were already starting to get color shifts.
You know, this doesn't look quite the way it does now.
Now, when we scan those in,
Is it like an old book?
Do we rebind it?
Do we take away the vellum?
Do we put on a modern leather cover just because it's a little worn along the edges?
So you address these, you have these issues that are... Well, you have to talk about it.
How do we deal with that now?
Well, what's the, do you have a policy?
For instance, I can think of a Matthew Brady photograph.
Oops, sorry about that.
Hold on.
Well, at this point, we don't make those changes without working with the photographer.
In many instances, with the photographers, the common agreement is that we look to restoring where we can, and with their cooperation, restoring that image to the original so it mirrors the intent of the photographer when they took the picture.
That's only done with the photographer's permission and participation.
So very limited at this point.
It's an expensive process, and it's an investment for us.
I mean, interestingly enough, when I, just to feed back to you on your comment, when I asked, in a meeting here, I asked Bill about that, he said, well, why not both?
Because that is sort of the aging of the transition, the maturation of the medium, and what does that mean?
I don't know.
I mean, there's a whole, there's a lot of issues about photojournalism and reportage, and what is the intent of this photography?
And it's, well, arguably, there's a lot of art in that work, and there's a lot of artistry in producing
wonderful photojournalism.
It's also about the capturing of essential information.
Yeah, but, you know, it's a very interesting point.
When you think of what the intent of the photographer was in a photojournalistic situation in the 60s, I don't think he wanted that image to fade or to discolor.
That's why we go back.
So that's why you do correct it.
You send a probe to the planets, and they have to correct those images to make them appear, you know,
So we have comfort with that, but now we step back, and you can think of the famous image of Lincoln, you know, in his hat, the portrait where the water stain on the original negative kind of came down, and up in the corner above his head, you've got this weird little liver-shaped mark, you know.
Do we fix that, or is now that image so much a piece of history that it would be analogous to our taking Photoshop and removing the crack out of a Liberty Bell?
You know, I mean...
I mean, where are the lines?
I mean, this is all of these issues are the issues of the new frontier.
But the lip taking the crack, I mean, just to continue the metaphor, taking the crack out of the Liberty Bill, you're fooling around with real life at that point.
If you're correcting a watermark on the negative, that happened quite apart from the artist who took the picture.
Well, it goes back to the comment I made on the Matthew Brady story.
Well, that's why I brought it up here.
In that kind of nostalgic perspective,
They're all questions.
I like the idea of both, but you brought up the Sistine Chapel.
The bottom line is they went and fixed it and arguably made it better.
Whether or not they restored it to what it was in the image of the artist is a whole other matter.
So when a photographer like the Ecuadorian you mentioned comes in and the American the day before, you're basically passing
judgment, professional judgment on what kinds of images you want for the archive, I guess.
So you will acquire licensing rights to these, and they'll enter the archive.
And as Laurie pointed out to me, then you'll keyword it.
I mean, it's not going to do you any good if people don't know what you have and how to get it, right?
That's right.
Absolutely right.
So you're basically what, as I mentioned earlier, the publishers would call an acquisitions editor.
Is that kind of roughly analogous?
Yeah, that would be it.
Your attitudes, I guess, your worldview plays a very critical part in all this, doesn't it?
I mean, what you think is relevant.
It's a group process, though, understand.
It's not just me, but it's a group process.
And we partner with a lot of experts in the field.
And we draw heavily.
That's a very good point.
We draw heavily on experts in the field.
And interestingly enough, in the area of photography, since we're talking about that, we draw heavily on the photographers themselves because they were there at that point.
So if you have a photographer that was working in Chechnya or Bosnia... So we're talking about contempt, obviously.
When you go back, you can't.
Unless there were diary entries or whatever.
Yeah, or west, you can go into the day books, and you can dig back into it.
No, I mean, there's a certain amount of choice that has to be made, and it's very much the same process that a librarian would have to go through.
Because, you know, we understand the idea that we want breadth.
And within each one of those, we want depth so that we adequately illustrate it and that that depth is to a degree that's useful for research, for education, for consumers, or for someone that just has personal interest.
And it's critical that those are the right choices.
I mean, a good example is if you take someone who's a train buff or an aviation buff.
When we develop transportation sub-theme trains, sub-theme aircraft or aviation,
trains, we have to make sure that we have good images and that we have the right images and we cover the major types of locomotion and the history of the development of that.
So we have narrow gauge, wide gauge, steam.
You better have a New York Central engine and you better have a Santa Fe engine too.
The right ones.
Because the thing is, even if it's an individual, they're an expert in the areas of their particular passion.
So if we think about the value of this as a resource,
You know, we may not be able to do everything ultimately, but the areas that we do, we have to think very good about.
It's very much like the librarian that has, you know, 72,000 square feet in their library.
Well, by the way, that only is going to hold a certain number of books and administrative support staff and everything else, okay?
It's public areas.
It's only going to hold a certain number of volumes before they have to add the wings.
So how many books on trains are they going to put on those shelves?
And which books are they?
Which ones are the most informative?
Which ones are the essential?
Just to go back to a couple of things, when you chose to go into photography, was this as a photographer or a historian?
As a photographer.
Really?
In the areas that were of particular passion to me.
It was visual communication.
That's what really interested me.
And did you work at this for a while?
Twenty-five years, and I'm still in fact.
That's one of yours?
He's published several books.
Really?
Very well known in nature.
I'll swap you with gentle madness for one of yours.
It's a deal.
Yeah, Charles has been in the industry for a very long time.
His expertise has been instrumental in building this team and being able to build this resource.
Well, I have a fair peculiar.
It's kind of like you, I bet, you see.
is that I have as much of a passion about the business of images and photography and visual communication as I do about making the images themselves.
It's probably you and your love for books as well as your love for writing books.
You'd probably make a great antiquarian book dealer, but could you do that full-time and still write about antiquarian books?
I couldn't make any money being an antiquarian book dealer.
I didn't.
Plus, you did, you didn't.
I kept keeping them all.
You can't sell the babies.
I could not afford to.
Well, you've got this thorough poster here.
My wife and I acquired at a sale last year.
This does not have to be in the tape.
So you were a bookseller where, in San Francisco?
No, Eureka, Northern California.
What was the name of the store?
It was called Osiris.
It was a bookstore that really focused on comparative philosophy and religions.
You were perfect for this job.
I mean, so tell me how you heard about this job.
You saw an advertisement for it?
We very carefully developed our standards.
Actually, I came here to interview them for an article, a series of articles I was writing on the future.
You said that.
Well, you know, among the other things, I mean, if you love books and you love photography, you always have the other fantasies for the things you want to do in your life.
And I had about three.
One of them was to, you know, work or run a nursery.
And I love plants a lot.
One of the others was to write, to be a writer, to try to get something published, and that was a big thing for me.
And I convinced a magazine to allow me to write a series of articles on the future of photography, and the first on photography in general, stock photography in particular.
And the future of photography was going to be one of the first articles.
So I had kind of looked around among, you know, the industry, and who could I go interview?
There you go.
Sure.
And when was this?
Oh, 1993.
Very recent.
Late 93.
I had asked a number of my acquaintances and friends, I mean, who do you know that would be a very interesting interview in a publication called Photo District News?
It said, well, you really can't.
Photo what news?
Photo District News said you really can't interview, you can't write this article without interviewing Continuum, which was now Corbis.
So I had, you know, directory information.
That company was originally Continuum?
We actually had that name during the research and development phase of the company.
Two chapters of my new book, as I mentioned, two are Continuum chapters.
When we went to send the products to market, there were 75 other Continuums in the U.S.
alone.
There is a publisher called Continuum, a small publisher in the East Coast.
So what's Quervis?
What does that mean?
It was actually the result of a naming search that we did.
It has a Latin root meaning of like a woven basket or vessel, but that really wasn't what we were after.
All the naming criteria, it's got to be short, so many syllables, start with a hard consonant.
You know, it was... I didn't know what Exxon went through when it changed over from... No nasty meanings in other languages.
That's right.
We had to do all the criteria.
I mean, I'm from Massachusetts, where there's Wang computers, and I mean... That's why I said people...
I mean, the joke, you know, I mean, how to name it for himself.
Well, that's, I mean, you know, there's that classic story of the Chevy Nova on sale in Spanish countries where Nova means it doesn't go.
Well, there you go.
You know, it's a little low.
Exxon was the classic case of that because they were changing the name and they went through, and this was long before there were computer searches, you know, it was a totally non-existent word that meant nothing in all the major languages of the world, you know.
Sometimes that's the criteria you use.
That's right.
We were kind of serendipitous.
But vessel is nice.
You see, Richard Dubarry called books the vessels of sacred wisdom, you know, which I quote in my book.
You'll see.
Well, they'll never replace the troubadours and the minstrels, but yeah.
They're all we have now.
So tell me again, you said you were a collector.
You had, did you, did,
For some reason, there's a number of 17,000 books.
Did you say that at the beginning?
No, but I had quite a library.
In fact, I sort of started taking over the rooms of my house.
At some point, the master bedroom was gone.
Another bedroom was gone.
It was rows and rows.
It was difficult for me to let them go.
So now I have a lot of anecdotal references.
Did you let them go?
Yeah, I did.
You sold them?
I was involved with a divorce years ago.
First marriage, and it's at my library.
It was a shame.
I did an interview with Joseph Hiller for my, I do a newspaper.
Were you a collector, per se?
I collected, primarily in comparative religion and philosophy.
Original editions?
Original editions as much as possible.
So it was an antiquarian collection as well as a scholarly collection.
Absolutely, yeah.
And it was, I had a, I had a lot of very diverse interests.
I mean, one of, one of the areas that I was quite interested in is, is, you know, sort of the
what I thought of as the parallel religions, the parallel paths that religious truth took out of that era that you were talking about earlier, and what really, what happened to the Neoplatonist Gnostics, and where did that go, and what really, you know, formed the foundation of Masonry, for example, what involvement that they have with carrying on certain aspects of that,
religious ideas and what influence did they have in political culture.
So I did collect heavily in areas like that, whether it was trying to follow the Rosicrucian movement through and the Masonic movement.
Did you get a tactile rush from handling exquisite things?
Well, I mean, it was amazing for me.
I remember stumbling onto this estate sale, and there was a set of seventeenth-century Robert Flood, early Rosicrucian.
Well, his works, I mean, the vellum was, I mean, it was the white, it was soft, it was just like... Like a fig-y mane.
Oh, it's just, it's like pearl.
I mean, it's just so... Like marble.
And these things, it was so amazing, see, that went, but the only memory I have is the musical director at the Shakespearean Festival in Ashland was doing his dissertation on Among Things, he needed Flood to do it, and the only copy of this book that was anywhere close was in the British Museum, so there's a little thing in the front of his dissertation.
special thanks to Charles Monsi for the loan of it.
So he's a book lover, he just loved it.
He's a musician, but he had that sense, you know.
I describe in my book, and this, everywhere I went, everybody I talked to, I had to handle the goods at some point.
And it had to be, you know, and there was that moment, and there was always this great moment that would arrive, and it was unpredictable.
But I describe this moment where I'm interviewing William Scheide, arguably the greatest book collector in the world.
His collection
at Princeton, still privately owned.
Well, do you travel in search of stuff?
Maybe you could tell me briefly about that.
I mean, are you a book scout like in the... You know, it's funny because this is not the first job I've had where I traveled extensively, but this is the first time I didn't spend half my time in bookstores when I got there.
Unfortunately, this job doesn't really allow me the chance to do that, although
We do work with a number of libraries and cultural institutions, and one of the pleasures and the rewards of this work is having the opportunity to sort of walk through these museums.
In many instances, have the senior staff who are very familiar with the work, who ordinarily would not have contact with the public, walk you through and look at the images.
I think back on my first trip to the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, and it was like,
Talk about not breeding.
I mean, they had to finally pull me out of the building.
You know, it was just like... So you do the negotiations, say, with the Hermitage and the Van Gogh?
Some, not those particular ones.
We have a pretty good team, and once it moves into a certain level of negotiation, that's hands... When's this battle station?
It means I have another meeting.
Well, I have to personalize my computers.
Again, I'm not a... So to make them friendly and accessible, mine talk...
But the battle station is... Star Trek, yeah.
That means there's a meeting or something that's up there, so it says Red Alert.
They have to talk.
Spock's on there.
I'm a Star Trek-y.
What can I say?
Although most of what it says is, you would like this when it starts up in the morning, it's Hal.
Most of the voice on this is the Hal 9000 computer from 2000.
Oh, I love that.
Did he ask you if you want to take a shower?
I'm sorry, I can't do that.
Or to talk about how times change.
You know, I got that tape to show my girls, and I'd never seen it before.
It was just about a month or two ago.
And I said, but look at this movie.
This was 1969 or whatever it was.
And they were projecting to 2001.
But look how huge the computer is.
See, they had no conception at that point of a computer, of a microchip.
That's right.
That computer, which would do more today than they envisioned for 2001,
Well, you know, it would not nearly be that size, right?
It would be just a very small, and we would probably keyboard things in it.
It would be entirely different from what they visualized.
Oh, you know, and the amazing thing is, I have to say, is that, you know, I was, I mean, long ago I was seduced by the book.
You know what I mean?
Long ago I was seduced by the book.
More recently I've been seduced by the computer, and really, because for me books were in part an experience and in part about the information that's in them.
And I really see the power of both.
And I have to say, I love them both.
And just to go back to, you mentioned that you see the CD-ROM
adventure here more or less celebrating what's in the archives absolutely so that's more or less picking the high spots so to speak finding something where you can create a narrative around you know where you have enough density you have enough depth first breath within it and it's compelling it makes a compelling story and more importantly it's a story that's not only compelling but it's important that people would care about it that it would enrich them when they had it so it's
It's really about the information and arranging in a very compelling way that are things that really mean something to people.
I mean, Curtis Wong is an absolute genius.
Don't tell him I said that.
I mean, he really, in his sense of combining sound and text, but more importantly, visuals in a way that makes for a compelling story.
I mean, the first product I ever saw of his had me in tears.
Well, what was that?
It was a thing he did with Pedro Meyer called I Photographed to Remember.
It was just, this was years ago.
And that's when, I mean, it was an about-face.
I was fairly staunchly, as a photographer and as someone working in that industry, not particularly keen on digital.
I saw that disc, I left the thing in tears, and I went there to argue against it.
You know, I went out going, my God, this had just turned my life around.
So you went over, haven't you?
No, I mean, I just, it was, the power of it was really interesting.
I mean,
And then you also mentioned, and then we can wrap it up for now if you want, that you want this to, and you use the image of Alexandria, you know, you want this to be an Alexandrian kind of a library for the 21st century, I guess.
So that suggests, you know, that there has to be a certain mass, a critical mass that you have to achieve.
Absolutely.
And do you have any specific goals in terms of numbers or in terms of
Do you have a plan, or are you just acquiring, acquiring, and we hope that it will get some focus?
No, it can't be that random.
I think there really is a lot of thought and planning that goes into that.
In terms of what the critical mass and critical number is, I don't think we've really been able to figure that out yet, because in a sense, and this may sound crass, but it's not really meant to be,
The market, the markets that we service will help determine that mass.
As we start working increasingly in the areas of education, with educational institutions, as our markets, even with the education, broaden out beyond North America, with consumers directly, even in licensing,
we can work out this sort of encyclopedic overview of what this looks like, but in order to be a business at the same time, to make this whole thing work and to make it viable, we have to prioritize among that range against those markets.
So as universities and K-12 start to tell us what really is interesting for curriculum planning, that'll influence where we go as publishers, news magazines, book publishers start to tell us what they're interested in.
We'll start to prioritize on that.
You see a
In good examples, you see a lot of flurry of activity on planning up to the millennium, the year 2000, 2001.
What kinds of materials are going to be used in that?
Well, as you start to look at that, it's that process of analyzing and thinking through and reacting to that has sent us moving very quickly to build all of those images with a historic context.
Because a lot of us are going to be looking back.
When we hit 2000,
That's going to be a very different New Year celebration, because a lot of more thoughtful people are really going to drift back over the last, you know.
I told you my book is being published, right?
Late 1999.
Yeah.
It's very important to just anticipate book culture, I guess.
Book culture.
The new title, by the way, is not a new book.
It's a new project we were working on with the Medford Historic Society.
and that wonderful collection, Civil War Photography.
Oh, do that book?
They're doing the book, but we have a relationship with them, and we're scanning in almost 2,000 images out of that collection.
I didn't know that.
But the interesting thing we did in order to be really true to that, because those are antique prints.
In many cases, the print, the negative, no longer exists, just the print.
So we're photographing those in color.
on a very high-quality, high-resolution color film, and then scanning it in color so all the nuance and tone of these wonderful prints is captured.
So we have that.
So it's not just black and white.
And where are you doing that?
In situ?
Or are you doing that?
No, they're being scanned here.
Are they?
Oh, yeah.
Not the photographs, the color photography.
No, no, no.
So that was a major, major story.
Stephen Jay Gould, who I've interviewed for this book, very articulate on these subjects,
He said, you know, he loves the computer for certain things, and he's a Civil War statue buff.
Now, there's some kind of project going on where every Civil War era statue in the whole United States is being photographed and scanned.
And I said, no, that's not going to work in a book, but it sure is going to work on a database or something that you can punch up.
You can take Civil War and Statue and type it in here, and you'll get some interesting work out of it.
Apparently this is going to document every gnome and every town and every interesting idea all over the United States.
This is the power of that computer.
I mean, it's going to change.
I don't think it's going to change...
the fact that books will continue to be published and loved and handled for all of the experience that those represent.
But it may change the computers.
This whole evolution that we're involved with could change the nature of what books are printed.
And this still remains to be seen, but I can certainly see a lot of reference materials that are just going to be too efficient to be done in a book form.
But more importantly, things that were never economically feasible
in book form, now become completely feasible with technology.
Let's say you have an interest in flight or trains that we talked about.
You're going to be able, you know, once we've really started flushing out all of the byways of the Corbett Archive, you're going to be able to search and arrange and aggregate visual information on a
against personal criteria that are of interest to you.
It's like essentially publishing your own volume.
That's right.
This was demonstrated to me two days ago at Stanford by Keller.
She said, now I'm going to just have this woman spend an hour with the Journal of Biological something or another to publish a monograph of a thousand copies and to buy this.
And, of course, it's going to be outdated the day it's out anyway.
It'll cost you $200 to buy a volume of it.
Now it's available here.
You know, you can punch up anything you want.
The graphics are there.
The illustrations in some cases are even better than you'd get in the book.
You can do the zooming in.
I mean, it's amazing.
Well, you know, the interesting thing is it can really force us back to reevaluating it and gaining a new appreciation, maybe a reinvigorated appreciation of the book itself, you know, because a lot of the more referenced pieces are going to fall into the realm of new media.
So I think that
In many instances, a lot of this computer access to this kind of information could really even enhance, I think, book publishing.
It'll really have publishers thinking more carefully about what kind of books can we publish that people will love.
I was at the ABA in June in Chicago.
I go every year.
That's where we met, as a matter of fact.
There was a whole level there just devoted to this stuff.
We did some searches in the archive.
We had the archive online.
That's what kind of made him see where Corbis might fit into this project.
Oh, it fits into this project.
Do you have a CV on Charles and all the people I'll be talking to?
I do.
taking a CD-ROM and putting it on the internet doesn't make a very interesting web experience.
You need to design to use the media to its best effect.
And it will really be its own creature.
Exactly.
And so that's what we're kind of looking at with our new online team is what sorts of publishing online, what sorts of experiences online are interesting and compelling.
And Curtis will talk to that, address himself for that.
Absolutely.
So this is the product development team.
It smells new.
We just punched down into these offices a few weeks ago.
We're on the second floor.
Laurie's talking again on this table.
Each development team is comprised of a producer and a designer and a developer and assistants.
And then we do occasionally contract out for some of the more sophisticated things like audio mixing or some of that sort of thing.
But we do a lot of the work in-house.
We partner with experts, subject experts, for instance, with Passion for Art.
We worked with some of the leading art history experts, experts on Impressionist art in Critical Mass, which is our title on the atomic bomb.
We worked with the Los Alamos facility and the head archivist there, as well as leading physicists and scientists from around the world.
We really, again, in this attempt to develop context around the story and provide an enriching experience, we really want to work with the best
And we know that we can't bring that level of research to it internally.
We need to partner with people out in the field.
We're working on a title right now on FDR that will be out in a few months.
That was in the PW.
Yeah, we've been working with Doris Kearns Goodwin, with Jeffrey Ward, who are some really noted experts in that field.
And they're actually narrating parts of the CD and doing some of the essays.
So that's kind of the caliber of people that we're trying to work with.
And this team down here, a very creative group.
Let's see.
Again, not much to work out, lots of offices with the computers and lamps, but the work that goes on here is really, really outstanding.
I don't know if I noted, I think I did, that all four of the existing titles have all been recognized with several awards.
You mentioned that, and you were probably going to get me a listing of that.
Passion for Art, the first title, I think has won just about every award that it could.
Just amazing acclaim for these titles, which is great testimony to the talent of the scene.
And when it started, was that the intent that at some point you would be...
producing these CDs?
Well, I mean, again, the original intent was, the charter was, okay, we think that someday digital content is going to be important.
Go out and figure out
figured out.
So we were looking at all sorts of opportunities, everything from, you know, interactive television to CD-ROMs to internet to, you know, kiosks and, you know, what do you do with digital content?
So several years were spent investigating all the options and going down many, many tracks as any R&D company will do.
And it wasn't until, you know, maybe two years ago that we really kind of said, okay,
You know, this has been great, but we could do R&D forever.
It's real interesting.
But let's figure out, you know, what are some businesses we can get our hands around?
And what are some businesses that are currently using digital images?
And two of the obvious ones were CD-ROM products and image licensing.
And so those were the first two business groups we developed.
But there will be others.
And as these sorts of things come out and as new markets emerge.
And they reveal themselves, I guess.
Exactly.
We'll be able to develop businesses that address those different markets.
It looks like Curtis isn't in his office.
Do you want to take a quick break?
Sure.
That would be good.